---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Artificial Intelligence
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2019-12-02
labels:
  - Artificial Intelligence
  - Rational Agent
  - Weak AI
  - Strong AI
---

What is Artificial Intelligence?
    As technology advances, there have been more strides to make machines run autonomously to make tasks more efficient. And to make machines run autonomously, they must be programmed to have artificial intelligence so that the machines can make their own choices and solve tasks by themselves.  What is artificial intelligence?  The concept of artificial intelligence was first brought up by Alan Turing with him “speculat[ing] in 1950 about ‘thinking machine’ that could reason at the level of a human being” (West 2018).  He created a test called the “Turing Test” in which he described that in order for a machine to be intelligent or autonomous, the machine would be able to answer a set of questions with an evaluator or judge not being able to distinguish the machine from another human being.  Artificial intelligence is creating a machine that can learn and solve problems on its own.  Garrido states the point of AI is to “create an admissible model for human knowledge” and “emulate the way of reasoning of the human brain” (December 2017).  These definitions give us a broad explanation of what an AI is, but how is an artificial intelligence made and what is it made of?  Roger Chau gives a simple set up process to designing an AI system: “1. Identify the problem. 2. Prepare the data. 3. Choose the algorithms. 4. Train the algorithms. 5. Choose a particular programming language. 6. Run on a selected platform.” (2019).  Sounds like a very simple process, but is it really?  Programming a machine to perform a task or set of tasks is a lot harder because of the various scenarios and errors that can occur during the process. Not to mention that the creator of the AI must determine the scope of which the machine should be able to solve problems.  Does the creator have a certain task that he wants accomplished by the AI or does he want the AI to have a broad intelligence of multiple things like a real human would have?  These two different scopes of problem solving are called weak and strong artificial intelligence.
Weak vs. Strong Artificial Intelligence
	When creating an artificial intelligence, the scope of which the AI is going to operate at is needed to determine how much work must be put in to creating the AI.  Weak AI, also known as Narrow AI, is used when the AI is only focusing on “performing a single task extremely well and while these machines may seem intelligent, they are operating under far more constraints and limitations than even the most basic human intelligence” (“Artificial Intelligence…”, 2019).  To the ever day person, AIs seem very intelligent, but in reality, they are limited to how much we can program them to react to certain scenarios.  For example, a self-driving car has the skills to drive to a location and prevent crashes but does not know how to accomplish other tasks that are not related to cars and driving.  Some notable weak AIs are self-driving cars, Siri, Alexa, and different algorithms that recommend things like YouTube recommending specific videos for you to watch or Amazon suggesting certain products to buy.  Strong AI, also known as Artificial General Intelligence, has a general intelligence about multiple things.  Some can be more advanced than others depending on the amount of information and data that the AI has and the variety of topics that it has knowledge on.  When people think about artificial intelligence and what it is, they are generally thinking about Strong AI.  People think that artificial intelligence would be advanced enough that it could learn information itself and be able to solve problems on its own just like a human.  This leads to people question ethicalness of artificial intelligence an whether they have sentience and should be given the same rights as human beings.  However, right now, Strong AI is not that strong because we have not been able to give AI an infinite scope over topics for it to learn about.  At the moment, we do not have a “true” Strong AI that is able to respond to any scenario; we are limited to the number of scenarios that we can program the AI to respond to.
Different Types of Artificial Intelligence Agents
	An agent, also known as a rational agent, is considered “anything which makes decisions, as a person, firm, machine, or software” (Banshall and Kulhary).  AIs are considered to be made up of an agent and its environment. Banshall and Kulhary also say that “An agent is anything that can be viewed as: perceived its environment through sensors and acting upon that environment through actuators”.  The types of agents are simple reflex, model-based, goal-based, utility-based, and learning.  Simple reflex agents are programs that monitor their environment and waits for a specific input.  Once that specific input happens, it goes down an if condition and performs the task or tasks that it needs to do when that scenario occurs.  The program is much like an infinite loop with it running until the specific input has been received and it executes its tasks, and then goes back to waiting for that specific input to occur again.  Model-based reflex agents are like simple reflex agents because they wait for a specific set of input to occur, and then perform a task or set of tasks when the input occurs.  The two agents differ in that the model-based reflex agent keeps track of an internal state, and every time that specific input occurs, it changes the internal state to reflect that input which means it keeps track of how many times that input occurs and does certain tasks based on the amount of times it has occurred.  Goal-based agents make decisions based on how far they are away from completing the goal they were programmed to do.  Every decision it makes is done to reduce how long it takes to accomplish the goal.  The agent is more flexible because it can decide what task it wants to do in order to decrease the time it takes to complete the goal.  Utility-based agents choose which tasks or methods to perform to achieve the end task based on utility.  It picks a path that creates the best result instead of focusing on one specific result. For example, it focuses on getting a result that is faster, cheaper, or safer instead of getting a result that is only the fastest result.  A learning agent is an agent that learns from past results.  This is what most people think that AI should be.  It learns from past mistakes and experiences and adapts which tasks it performs based on what has happen in prior runs.  To make a stronger AI, sometimes multiple agents are used to complete a more difficult task.  Agents will form a type of hierarchy so that sub-agents can focus on smaller tasks.
Pros and Cons of Artificial Intelligence and How Artificial Intelligence is Being Used
    With artificial intelligence, we can automate so many different tasks that would take up hours of our time but might take half the time or even less if we have a computer work on it instead.  We use artificial intelligence to recommend items to us like with the YouTube or Amazon algorithms.  We have artificial intelligence that can answer basic questions or google answers for us like Siri and Alexa.  Gmail uses an AI algorithm to sort through emails and place spam in the spam folder.  Self-driving cars use AI to determine proper driving patterns and how to avoid hitting objects.  There are many different ways that people are currently using AI systems to accomplish and automate tasks.  There are some concerns regarding AI with the ethics of creating an intelligence, and also, how well will these AIs work and accomplish the task assigned to it.  If an AI is advanced enough to solve ethical problems and “think” for itself, do we treat them with the same rights as a human being.  Where is the line that separates artificial intelligence and biological intelligence? Do we treat them the same?  When someone loses a leg and gets a prosthetic to replace it, we treat the prosthetic as a leg because it serves the same purpose as a leg.  Why not treat an advanced artificial intelligence the same as a human mind?  Currently, this is not a major problem because AIs are not advanced enough to think like a human mind to solve problems.  A current problem with artificial intelligence is do we really need to automate processes to AIs if they are not efficient enough to do them or the process to automate it would take to long to complete.  To get a computer to complete a task based on certain scenarios that occur in an environment is a lot more complicated than a human because the computer needs to properly sense that the event has occurred and be able to properly complete the task that need to do to respond to the event where a human mostly does this automatically (responds to stimuli).  Another reason that automating AI may be detrimental to society is if we rely on the automation of a task through AI, will we forget how to complete the task ourselves if the AI ever fails to work?  For non-difficult tasks, this may not be a problem, but if a complicated task is automated and the AI stops working and is not able to be repaired, there would only be a very small amount of people who could be able to complete the task if most people relied on the task being automated.  Overall, though, AIs would be beneficial to society because it would cut the time it would take to complete tasks.  Although, we should not heavily rely on artificial intelligence in case that it stops working properly, and we need to manually complete the task.
Summary
	Artificial intelligence is a machine that is autonomous and can solve tasks similarly to human beings.  An AI can be either gather information on a specific topic to complete a task (a weak AI) or can gather information on various topics to complete various tasks (strong AI).  Artificial intelligence can be made of various types of agents which tells an AI how to learn from collecting data and how to complete tasks.  AIs can also be composed of multiple agents to become stronger.  Overall, artificial intelligence is a great way to automate tasks and save time rather than have humans spend hours on tasks.  
 
References
Artificial Intelligence: What is Artificial Intelligence? How Does AI Work? (2019). Retrieved from https://builtin.com/artificial-intelligence.
Bansall, S., and Kulhary, R. (n.d.). Agents in Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/agents-artificial-intelligence/
Chau, R. (2019, May 30). A simple way to explain how to build an AI system. Retrieved from https://becominghuman.ai/a-simple-way-to-explain-how-to-build-an-ai-system-61f0e7367606.
Garrido, Á. (December 2017). Brain and Artificial Intelligence. BRAIN: Broad Research in Artificial Intelligence & Neuroscience, 8(4), p85-90. Retrieved from https://www.edusoft.ro/brain/index.php/brain/article/view/729.
West, D. M. (2018, October 4). What is artificial intelligence? Retrieved from https://www.brookings.edu/research/what-is-artificial-intelligence/.


Written by Rachel Skonning