---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: The History of Operating Systems
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2020-04-27
labels:
  - Operating Systems
  - Serial Processing
  - Simple Batch Systems
  - Multiprogramming
  - Multiprocessing
  - Time-Sharing
  - UNIX
  - Linux
  - Windows
---

Serial Processing
    The history of computer operating systems starts with the history of computers and how they began.  In the beginning, computers did not start out with operating systems.  The first computers started out with the user acting as the operating system and would set up the program manually with punched paper representing binary (“Computer History…”).  If there was any problem within the instructions, the computer would crash, and the instructions had to be fixed and the whole process had to be started over again which could take hours maybe days.  These type of computers have a serial processing type of operating system.  Serial processing is not a true independent operating system since the user of the computer had to manually put in the instructions. The first computer was ENIAC, which made use of the punched card system, and it was built in 1945 by the Moore School of Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania (Krzyzanowski).  It was created to complete calculations for the US military during World War 2.  There was a few successors to the ENIAC: EDSAC, EDVAC, BINAC, UNIVAC, and IBM 701.  EDSAC and EDVAC, both completed in 1949, introduced computer memory which allowed for programs to be stored in memory rather than having someone manually putting in each instruction (Krzyzanowski).  BINAC brought about programming languages, and UNIVAC brought about the start of reusable code.  The IBM 701 brought about better reusable code, that faced less problems than UNIVAC, and also assembly language.
Simple Batch Systems
	The next type of operating system was the simple batch system.  The first batch system started with IBM 701, but was improved to be used by IBM 704 (Stallings 53).  Batch processing systems processed jobs in batches.  Jobs came with instructions that were written in job control languages.  According to Krzyzanowski, the languages “provided a way for programs to define their resource needs, such as what tapes or card readers they need to use and what their anticipated run time is.”  Fortran was also being developed during this time in the early 50s.  It is considered the first high-level programming language.
Multiprogramming and Multiprocessing 
	At the start of the 1960s, the goal trying to be achieve for operating systems is to increase the efficiency of the processor and keep it from idling.  Computer systems were big, bulky, and very expensive so it was quite important to make sure that the processor was operating efficiently.  To fix the inefficiency, multiprogramming was set into place which allowed several programs to be in storage at once and have the processor switch between the different programs without leading to downtime.  Another way of solving this inefficiency was multiprocessing, having multiple processors working simultaneously to finish the task at hand.
Time-Sharing
	After the creation of multiprogramming batch systems and multiprocessing, which allowed for efficiency but lacks interaction with user, time sharing systems were created to solve that issue.  Transaction processing was important and requires user interaction.  IBM developed the SABRE system for American Airlines in 1960 which allowed the airline to handle flight reservations (Krzyzanowksi).  Time sharing systems allowed for multiple user to access the same system.  With the development of time sharing, it brought about one of the last basic principles of operating systems.  In 1965, “a set of eight principles that became the starting point for a new generation of operating systems: Interactive computing(time-sharing), Hierarchical file systems, Fault tolerant structures, Interrupt systems, Automated overlays(virtual memory), Multiprogramming, Modular programming, Controlled information sharing” (Denning 30-31).  The first proper time sharing system was called the Compatible Time-Sharing System.  It was created by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1962, and it ran on the IBM 7094 (Krzyzanowski).  Another operating system that gave a lot of firsts for the world of computing was the Burroughs Master Control Program (MCP).  The MCP was created in 1963 for the B5000.  It was the first operating systems that was written in a high level language and had the features of multiprogramming, multiprocessing, virtual memory, and the ability to debug the programming language.
Features of Modern Operating Systems and UNIX
	As time continues, the goal for computers was to make them less bulky and cost less.  As such, operating systems also have the goal of having adequate features, but also having good performance.  In 1964, Multics was created by MIT, General Electrics, and Bell Labs; it included a lot of features, but because of how bulky it was, performance was slow.  Bell Labs was unsatisfied with how Multics turned out and went to make their own operating system UNIX in 1969.  It was written completely in assembly language and incorporated some of the best features of Multics: “hierarchical file system, multiple levels of file access permission, input/output redirection, and pipes” (Krzyzanowksi).  In 1973, the fourth edition of UNIX was released with it mainly being written in the C language and was very affordable for universities.  It was an easy to understand operating system and was easy to modify which allowed it to be ported to different computers.  UNIX would eventually lead to the creation of Linux.
Linux
	Linux was created in 1991 by Linus Torvalds as a simple kernel.  The operating system really took off due to “the availability of free software packages under the auspices of the Free Software Foundation” (Stallings 94).  While UNIX was readily available to universities, it was hard for individuals to own.  Linux changed the system with it being open sourced, allowing anyone to download it and make changes to it.  Linux is described as being “highly modular and easily configured”, which allows it to be a great resource for computer science students for learning more about operating systems and messing around with them (Stallings 95).  Although Linux has never really taken off in mainstream desktop computing (with the general public who don’t know much about computers using Windows and macOS as their choice), Linux has been incredibly useful for small devices such as smart phones and small projects, but also cloud computing.  Linux servers are also considered superior to most other servers with it “not only replac[ing] Unix servers, but has also been used when Windows servers have failed” (Saran 9).
Windows
	Another major operating system that has a lasting impression on computers is Windows.  Windows is one of the most known operating systems with about 1 billion people using the operating system and 400 million active users using Windows 10 (Warren).  Windows 1.0 came out in 1985, but was considered just a slow buggy graphical display of MS-DOS; in 1990, Windows 3.0 came out and became a hugely popular system (Krzyzanowksi).  Windows provided a graphical display that allowed users who did not have any knowledge of computer architecture to use a system for business or personal reasons.  It may not be the best operating system, but has allowed many to use with little experience.

















Works Cited
“Computer History: Tracing the History of the Computer – History of Operating Systems.” Computer Nostalgia, www.computernostalgia.net/articles/HistoryofOperatingSystems.htm.
Denning, Peter J. “Fifty Years of Operating Systems.” Communications of the ACM, vol. 59, no. 3, Mar 2016, p30-32. Business Source Complete, Access no: 113448188.
Krzyzanowski, Paul. “Operating Systems: A brief look at the evolution of computer systems.” Rutgers University, 27 Jan 2015, www.cs.rutgers.edu/~pxk/416/notes/01-intro.html.
Saran, Cliff. “How Linux has influenced modern-day IT.” Computers Weekly, 25 Oct 2016, p7-9. MasterFILE Premier, Access no: 119070291.
Stallings, William. “Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles.” Prentice Hall, 2012.
Warren, Tom. “Apple reveals Windows 10 is four times more popular than the Mac.” The Verge, 4 Apr 2017, www.theverge.com/2017/4/4/15176766/apple-microsoft-windows-10-vs-mac-users-figures-stats.


Written by Rachel Skonning