---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Ethics in Automobile Software
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2020-09-10
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Ethical Principles
  - Software Ethics
  - Ethical Case Study
  - ACM Ethics and Professional Practices
---

Ethics in Automobile Software
	Automobile software can be a huge deal in the case of ethics because they have the capability to manipulate the performance of a vehicle.  That manipulation can either be good such as the vehicle can conserve power or be more fuel efficient or bad such as a vehicle being able to tell its emissions are being tested and expel less harmful fumes or to be able to remotely stop a vehicle through its software.  Big technology and automobile companies can get away with a lot of harm with their software if consumers and outside agencies are not allowed to see what their software does, but outside parties can also cause harm as well if they are able to access the software and are able to manipulate the outcome to cause real damage.  There needs to be some form of regulation or oversight over these companies so that they do not cause lasting harm through their software; people should be able to look at the software of their vehicle to know how it functions, but if they are going to manipulate it to cause harm, there should be consequences.  If they modify the software, it should be at their own discretion; it may not be legal to drive a vehicle with modified software because it could cause risk to others on the road.  To sum up the scenario, consumers/agencies should be allowed to study/modify automobile software because it is their right to know how the cars function; there is risk allowing people to manipulate the software, but there is more ethical dilemma in being ignorant on what the software can do and what big companies are trying to get away with in their code if there is no oversight in their actions.
	Allowing outside parties to study/modify code would have an outcome on certain industries and organizations also known as stakeholders.  Some of these stakeholders are: automobile manufacturing, the EPA and the NTHSA, The Electronic Frontier Foundation, and consumers and the general public.  Allowing access to software of automobiles would have a toll on the automobile industry because they want to keep their software as part of the brand and have secrecy in the matter because they don’t want anyone to be copying their software.  However, if allowed to keep their software to themselves there is a chance that they can do harm to the environment or gather unnecessary data.  For example, in 2015, Volkswagen admitted they had a software in some of their vehicles that made it possible that when the car was undergoing an emissions test, it would expel less emissions than when on the road.  When the car drove regularly, it expelled 40 times the emissions allowed by the EPA.  The Environmental Protection Agency and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration may benefit from being able to see what the software does in vehicles by knowing what the software does wrong in regards to emissions or safety issues.  Having a look at the software allows these organizations to be able to regulate whether the vehicle is safe for the environment and the roads.  However, having the software out in public may also be detrimental for the safety of the roads because people could manipulate the code and cause automobiles to crash or not perform in a proper action that could cause loss of life or severe injuries.  The Electronic Frontier Foundation benefits greatly from allowing access to this software because the oversight allows for consumers’ rights to be protected and make sure that these companies do not violate any laws or commit unethical practices within their code.  Consumer and the general public benefit from having it in the public domain because it improves the safety concerns with car manufacturing; it also allows people to help build/maintain vehicles in their position instead of having to go to a professional, however it may be wiser to go to a professional if the person has no experience with the software.  Having the software available to the general public can also be detrimental because someone could manipulate the software to cause harm to vehicle and to the passengers inside.  Overall, there is more benefits to having the software out in public domain than having it hidden from viewing.
	Allowing access to automobile software is important instead of allowing companies getting away possible ethic violations.  For example, if we take the 2015 Volkswagen incident and apply the Viral News Test to it, when this incident came out it broke the news and was scandalous.  It violated environmental emissions and in turn ethics because the company was not being truthful and was destroying the environment in the process.  Applying the Viral News Test to the proposed decision of automobile software being in public domain, it is not scandalous; it allows the public to have a thorough insight on how their cars operate and know that the software does not do anything unethical.  This shows the software engineering ethical principle of management because it shows that the companies’ leaders are trying to promote ethical practices in their software, and by allowing the public to view the software, the public can maintain their vehicle or offer insight on what could be a flaw in the software.  Another ethics test that can be performed on our scenario is the character/virtue test.  Allowing the software to be in the public domain is the most ethical otherwise there is no oversight on the software, and the auto companies can fill their software with unethical practices.  Having the software in public domain should be the action a company should take because it shows that the company is being clear and open about how their vehicles operate and show that they are not committing unethical practices.  Also, it makes sense because it would be the right balance between excellence and success because it shows that the company is truthful and willing to compromise for the public’s best interests; this shows that this action takes in the ethical principle of public because it shows that companies care about the public.  Putting the software in public domain passes the ethical tests while leaving the software with companies with no oversight could make the situation fail the ethical tests.
	Placing automobile software in public domain is ethically the right decision to make as it passes the ethical tests rather than continuing to allow possible ethics violations to occur which fails the ethic tests.  Allowing the software to be in public domain seems like the right thing to do, but it may come with consequences such as people purposely manipulating vehicles to cause harm.  A different solution to this scenario is only allowing certain organizations like the EPA, NHTSA, and the Electronic Frontier Foundation access to the software to monitor the ethics of the software to make sure that companies are not overstepping their bounds.  This allows only a limited amount of people viewing the code so that makes it a whole less likely that someone can manipulate it and cause harm to passengers and pedestrians.  Overall, if there is oversight in automobile software, it would greatly benefit all parties except perhaps the automobile manufacturing industry.  Having their code exposed may allow others to steal it and not allow their code to be “unique” but could also allow for security flaws.  It would take regulation/some kind of monitoring to make sure that people would not manipulate the code in a malicious way.  It still makes more sense to allow access to the software as it benefits a whole lot more people than detriments because the only party affected significantly negatively is the automobile industry. The automobile industry can handle the impact of this decision as they have a hefty profit margin and can always make cuts to their ceos’ millions of dollars salaries.  This outcome would also allow for an influx of jobs in government agencies to overlook code for ethical violations.  These agencies can be funded by fees charged to companies that violate ethical principles in their code and cutting other government funding such as our near trillion dollar military budget.  Overall, it seems a lot more beneficial to put these softwares in public domain.
	
Written by Rachel Skonning